add metrics page (#32)
stateless-consensus/eth-stateless-book: src/development/verkle-replay.md

## Context

This data is gathered replaying ~200k historical blocks around the Shanghai fork. While they do not give a perfect view of how execution will behave once EIP-4762 is active, it still gives a good indication of what to expect, and how the spec should evolve.

## Witnesses

This section explores multiple dimensions of the execution witness design.

### Size

Research has been conducted, in order to determine the best structure for a witness. We tried four methods:

 * The first one, as specified in the [current version of the consensus spec](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/dev/specs/_features/eip6800/beacon-chain.md#executionwitness), referred to as **type 0**. This approach uses the SSZ type `Optional[T]` , that is yet to be officially included in the spec.
 * A first variation of the spec, in which prestate values are grouped together in their own list, and poststate values are grouped in their own list as well. This is referred to as **type 1**.

```python
class SuffixStateDiffs(Container):
    suffixes: bytes
    # None means not currently present
    current_values: List[bytes]
    # None means value not updated
    new_values:     List[bytes]
```

> Type 1 serialization container

Reviewer: Do we need these `Type X serialization container` "legend" when the previous sentence already says `This is referred as **type X**`? (applies to all types)

If you want to keep them, I'd suggest putting them in italics to signal is referring to the thing above and not being a loose sentence.

Author: it's left from notion, I'll remove it

```
Type 2 serialization container

 * A final variation, where update, reads, inserts and proof-of-absences are grouped, along with their suffixes, into their own lists. This is referred to as **type 3**.

```python
class UpdateDiff(Container):
    suffix: byte
    current: Bytes32
    new: Bytes32

class ReadDiff(Container):
    suffix: byte
    current: Bytes32

class InsertDiff(Container):
    suffix: byte
    new: Bytes32

class MissingDiff(Container):
    suffix: byte
class StemStateDiff(Container):
    stem: Bytes31

    updates: List[UpdateDiff]
    reads: List[ReadStateDiff]
    insert: List[InsertDiff]
    missing: List[MissingStateDiff]
```
Type 3 serialization container

Here are our findings after replaying data:

![image.png](./assets/total.png)

One can see that the spec is much less efficient than the other types. This is due to the inefficiency of storing `Optional[T]`. As a result, we didn’t include this method in the rest of the analysis.

When only considering witnesses that were produced after the whole state was [converted to verkle](../state-conversion/intro.md), this is what is found:

![image.png](./assets/compare_post_transition.png)

> The maximum and minimum observed sizes for each type, are summarized in the following table:

Reviewer: Still not sure about the "minimum observed":
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e809bc61-8801-4404-b63c-a6105eec12ff)

there are measurements where the minimum is almost zero. That was my point in my original review comment. 

BTW, I think saying the "minimum" is somewhat irrelevant exactly for the point I'm making. It's always zero or close to zero for mostly empty blocks.

|Name|Min (KB)|Max (KB)|
|-|-|-|
|type 1|425|1285|
|type 2|383|928|
|type3|380|928|

While type 2 and type 3 are quite close, one can see that type 3 has better average and minimum sizes.

### Witness size breakdown (type 3)

Replaying past blocks, we generated the witnesses and could provide the following size breakdown for type 3 witnesses. This is averaged over ~134k blocks, as the conversion blocks were skipped.

|Component|avg size %|min size %|max size %|
|-|-|-|-|
|keys|13|9|49|
|pre-values|78|7|85|
|post-values|0.1|0|47|
|verkle proof|12|8|77|

### Takeaways

The key takeaways are:

 * Type 3 witnesses offer a great compression.

>  * Although post-state values don't take much time on average, but can take up almost half of it in the worst case. It would make sense to remove them, as validating them requires block execution.

Reviewer: Maybe you wanted to say?:
```suggestion
 * Although post-state values don't take much size on average, they can take up almost half of it in the worst case. It would make sense to remove them, as validating them requires block execution.
```
